applications: nrf_desktop: Add basic HID SCI support on peripheral (#30250)
nrfconnect/sdk-nrf: applications/nrf_desktop/doc/ble_latency.rst

   :local:
   :depth: 2

> The Bluetooth LE latency module manages Bluetooth LE connection parameters to regulate report latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Bluetooth LE latency module manages Bluetooth LE connection parameters to regulate data exchange latencies and power consumption.
```

Reviewer: The BLE connection latency affects more GATT reads/writes (initiated by dongle) than HID input reports (transmitted through GATT notifications; initiated by peripheral)

> The module is responsible for managing the Bluetooth LE connection parameters to regulate the report latency.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The Bluetooth LE latency module manages Bluetooth LE connection parameters to regulate report latency.
```

> The Bluetooth LE latency module manages Bluetooth LE connection parameters to regulate data exchange latencies and power consumption.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
The Bluetooth® LE latency module manages Bluetooth LE connection parameters to regulate data exchange latencies and power consumption.
```
Could remove the trademark from line 11.

> Use the Bluetooth® LE latency module for the following purposes:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Use the Bluetooth LE latency module for the following purposes:
```

Reviewer 3: This comment and the below comment is not addressed.

* Lower the Bluetooth LE connection latency when the :ref:`nrf_desktop_config_channel` is in use or when a firmware update is received either by the :ref:`nrf_desktop_ble_smp` or :ref:`nrf_desktop_dfu_mcumgr` (low latency ensures quick data exchange).
* Request setting the initial connection parameters for a new Bluetooth connection.
* Keep the connection latency low for the LLPM (Low Latency Packet Mode) connections to improve performance.

> * Handle HID Shorter Connection Intervals (SCI) mode change requests and adjust the peripheral latency within the active SCI mode.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
* Handle mode change requests for HID Shorter Connection Intervals (SCI) and adjust the peripheral latency within the active SCI mode.
```

If the connection is not secured during this period of time, the peripheral device disconnects.

> You can set the option :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_BLE_LOW_LATENCY_LOCK` to keep the connection latency low for the LLPM connections.

Reviewer: You could think about introducing `CONFIG_DESKTOP_BLE_LOW_LATENCY_LOCK` also for SCI. The option speeds up sending the first HID report after not sending a report for some connection intervals (at the cost of increased power consumption).

Reviewer: IIRC this is achieved by keeping HF clock active all the time

Author: I was sure I already had a separate task for that, but I actuallly didn't so I created one: NCSDK-40501

Author: Ok - now I remember why I actually did not create the task - using a "ble latency lock" would be actually equivalent to simply using HID SCI mode FAST with max latency set to 0 - so adding separate code for latency locking is actually not necessary

The option requires :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_USE_LLPM`.
This speeds up sending the first HID report after not sending a report for some connection intervals.
Enabling this option increases the power consumption - the connection latency is kept low unless the device is in the low power mode.

You can use the :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_BLE_LATENCY_PM_EVENTS` Kconfig option to enable or disable handling of the power management events, such as :c:struct:`power_down_event` and :c:struct:`wake_up_event`.
The option is enabled by default and depends on the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_PM_EVENTS` Kconfig option.

> You can enable the :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HIDS_SCI_ENABLE` Kconfig option to handle HID SCI mode change requests in the module.

Reviewer: Should we mention `CONFIG_DESKTOP_BLE_LATENCY_SCI_ENABLE` (similarly as we done for dongle case)?

Reviewer: The `CONFIG_DESKTOP_HIDS_SCI_ENABLE` would be described in HIDS module docs

Author: done

> You can enable the :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_BLE_LATENCY_HIDS_SCI_ENABLE` Kconfig option to handle HID SCI mode change requests in the module.

Reviewer: Consider splitting `Configuration`  into subsections (to improve readability)

Author: I think it would add much value here, the section is already nicely split into one KConfig per paragraph and there does not seem to be a logical way to group the options together. So - with the current approach to configuration, there is no need to add subsections

Reviewer: I was thinking a bit about using a separate section per Kconfig option, but it's not mandatory.

You can use the :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_BLE_LATENCY_PM_EVENTS` Kconfig option to enable or disable handling of the power management events, such as :c:struct:`power_down_event` and :c:struct:`wake_up_event`.
The option is enabled by default and depends on the :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_CAF_PM_EVENTS` Kconfig option.

You can enable the :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_BLE_LATENCY_HIDS_SCI_ENABLE` Kconfig option to handle HID SCI mode change requests in the module.
The option selects the Bluetooth LE Host and Controller features required for shorter connection intervals support and applies the nRF Desktop peripheral default SCI parameters defined in :file:`src/modules/Kconfig.sci.defaults.periph`.

> The option cannot be used together with LLPM (:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_USE_LLPM`) and depends on shorter connection intervals support in the Bluetooth Controller.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The option selects the required Bluetooth LE Host and Controller features for support of shorter connection intervals.
It also applies the default SCI parameters for the nRF Desktop peripheral, defined in :file:`src/modules/Kconfig.sci.defaults.periph`.
The option cannot be used together with LLPM (:option:`CONFIG_CAF_BLE_USE_LLPM`).
It depends on Bluetooth Controller support for shorter connection intervals.
```

The pending flag is cleared after this check, even when no follow-up request is sent.
This prevents cyclic connection rate requests when a previous update failed or did not take effect.

.. _nrf_desktop_ble_latency_sci_host_updates:

Out-of-spec host-initiated transport parameter updates
------------------------------------------------------

The HID over GATT Profile specification defines how HID SCI transport parameters must be negotiated.
According to `HID Over GATT Profile Specification`_, Section 7.5.2 (*HID Host-initiated transport parameter updates*):

   The HID Host **must** negotiate transport parameters by writing to the HID Control Point characteristic to initiate a new negotiation.

Section 7.5.1 defines the complementary device-initiated path:

   The HID Device must initiate the transport parameters update by initiating the Connection Update Request with the HID Host.

The nRF Desktop peripheral follows the device-initiated path when it adjusts peripheral latency within the active SCI mode.
It expects the connected HID host to use the HID Control Point characteristic when requesting an SCI mode change.

> If the connected host updates transport parameters directly at the Link Layer (for example, by initiating a connection rate update without first writing to the HID Control Point characteristic), the peripheral treats this as out-of-spec behavior.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the connected host updates transport parameters directly at the Link Layer (for example, by initiating a connection rate update instead of writing to the HID Control Point characteristic), the peripheral treats this as out-of-spec behavior.
```

When a :c:struct:`ble_peer_sci_conn_rate_event` is received without a prior HID SCI mode request, the module:

> * Attempts to determine a matching SCI mode for the received parameters, starting from the current mode and then trying modes in the order of FAST, DEFAULT, LOW_POWER, and FULL_RANGE.

Reviewer: Shouldn't we move `If no SCI mode matches the parameters, switches to the NONE mode.` here (as part of the same bullet point)?

Author: done (rephrased a bit)

> * Blocks the ability of the peripheral to autonomously change connection latency.

Reviewer: Consider moving `From this point on, the module will not attempt to update the latency until it returns to normal operation.` to this bullet point

Reviewer: I would also add `The module drops any pending HID SCI mode or latency update requests too.` also under this bullet point

Author: Indeed, the list required a bit of cleanup. See now. I generally applied your remarks, but I like it better when the "dropped pending requests" are in a separate bullet point

> * Cancels any pending HID SCI mode or latency update requests.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Drops any pending HID SCI mode or latency update requests.
```

* If no SCI mode matches the parameters, switches to the NONE mode.
  From this point on, the module will not attempt to update the latency until a new connection rate update is received.

This recovery behavior is application-specific and is not mandated by the specification.
It allows the peripheral to remain connected and usable with hosts that do not follow the Control Point negotiation procedure.
In order to return to the normal operation, the host must:

> 1. Update the transport parameters to a range allowing to support all the HID SCI modes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Update the connection rate parameters to a range allowing to support all the HID SCI modes.
```

Reviewer: Consider mentioning that this ensures proper handling of connection rates for every HID SCI mode.

> 2. Request an SCI mode change through the HID Control Point characteristic.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Request an HID SCI mode change through the HID Control Point characteristic.
```

Reviewer: Consider mentioning that this must be done to make BLE latency module request matching connection rate update and clear the information about the out-of-spec host-initiated transport parameter update.

Author: done (both remarks)

   * The nRF Desktop central ignores the requested connection interval, and only the connection latency is updated.

   For more detailed information, see the :ref:`nrf_desktop_ble_conn_params` documentation page.

HID Shorter Connection Intervals
==================================

> When the :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_BLE_LATENCY_HIDS_SCI_ENABLE` Kconfig option is enabled, the module can handle connection latency using the connection rate API (:c:func:`bt_conn_le_conn_rate_request`) in addition to the standard connection parameter update API (:c:func:`bt_conn_le_param_update`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_BLE_LATENCY_HIDS_SCI_ENABLE` Kconfig option is enabled, the module can handle connection latency using the connection rate API (:c:func:`bt_conn_le_conn_rate_request`) instead of the standard connection parameter update API (:c:func:`bt_conn_le_param_update`).
The connection rate API is used for Bluetooth LE peers that support HID SCI.
```

Connection parameter API selection
-----------------------------------

By default, the module uses the standard connection parameter update API (:c:func:`bt_conn_le_param_update`) to handle connection parameters.
Once a :c:struct:`hid_sci_mode_request_event` or a :c:struct:`ble_peer_sci_conn_rate_event` is received, the module latches the connection into SCI handling for the remainder of that Bluetooth link.
While latched, all subsequent latency adjustments in the module use :c:func:`bt_conn_le_conn_rate_request`, and :c:struct:`ble_peer_conn_params_event` events are ignored.

> The latch is cleared only on disconnect.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Once a :c:struct:`hid_sci_mode_request_event` or a :c:struct:`ble_peer_sci_conn_rate_event` is received, the module marks the peer as SCI capable.
All the subsequent connection parameter adjustments for the peer rely on :c:func:`bt_conn_le_conn_rate_request` and :c:func:`bt_conn_le_param_update` is no longer used.
```

Module events
-------------

The module listens for the following SCI-related events:

* :c:struct:`hid_sci_mode_request_event` - Submitted by the :ref:`nrf_desktop_hids` when the connected Bluetooth host requests an SCI mode change through the HID control point characteristic.

>   The module requests a connection rate update that matches the requested mode.

Reviewer: `The Bluetooth LE latency module ...`

Author: done

* :c:struct:`ble_peer_sci_conn_rate_event` - Submitted by the :ref:`nrf_desktop_ble_state` when a connection rate update completes or fails.

>   The module validates the new connection rate parameters against the requested or current SCI mode.

Reviewer: ``The Bluetooth LE latency module ...``

Author: done

>   If the parameters are not valid for the requested mode, the module attempts to find a valid SCI mode, starting from the most restrictive mode (FAST) and ending with the least restrictive mode (FULL_RANGE).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  If the parameters are not valid for the requested nor current mode, the module attempts to find a valid SCI mode, starting from the most restrictive mode (FAST) and ending with the least restrictive mode (FULL_RANGE).
```

Author: done

  If no valid SCI mode is found, the module defaults to the NONE mode.

When an SCI mode other than NONE is active, the module adjusts the peripheral latency within the limits of the active mode in response to the same data transfer events as in the non-SCI case (:c:struct:`config_event` and :c:struct:`ble_smp_transfer_event`).
The module skips the latency update request if the maximum latency configured for the active SCI mode is zero, because such a request would have no effect.

.. note::
   The :option:`CONFIG_DESKTOP_HIDS_SCI_ENABLE` option selects :kconfig:option:`CONFIG_BT_HIDS_SCI`.

>    Make sure that the GATT pool sizes defined in :file:`Kconfig.ble` and the maximum number of HIDS attributes defined in :file:`src/modules/Kconfig.hids` are sufficient for your configuration.

Reviewer: Can we move this note to the `hids` module, please? (it seems to belong there)

Author: done

  The Bluetooth LE latency module validates the new connection rate parameters against the requested or current SCI mode.
  If the parameters are not valid for the requested nor current mode, the module attempts to find a valid SCI mode, starting from the most restrictive mode (FAST) and ending with the least restrictive mode (FULL_RANGE).
  If no valid SCI mode is found, the module defaults to the NONE mode.

When an SCI mode other than NONE is active, the module adjusts the peripheral latency within the limits of the active mode in response to the same data transfer events as in the non-SCI case (:c:struct:`config_event` and :c:struct:`ble_smp_transfer_event`).
The module skips the latency update request if the maximum latency configured for the active SCI mode is zero, because such a request would have no effect.

Pending SCI mode and latency updates
------------------------------------

The module allows only one connection rate update to be in flight at a time.
When a connection rate change is already in progress, further SCI-related actions are deferred instead of issuing another request immediately.

> A pending state state is set when:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
A pending state is set when:
```

Section 7.5.1 defines the complementary device-initiated path:

   The HID Device must initiate the transport parameters update by initiating the Connection Update Request with the HID Host.

The nRF Desktop peripheral follows the device-initiated path when it adjusts peripheral latency within the active SCI mode.
It expects the connected HID host to use the HID Control Point characteristic when requesting an SCI mode change.

If the connected host updates transport parameters directly at the Link Layer (for example, by initiating a connection rate update without first writing to the HID Control Point characteristic), the peripheral treats this as out-of-spec behavior.
When a :c:struct:`ble_peer_sci_conn_rate_event` is received without a prior HID SCI mode request, the module:

* Attempts to determine a matching SCI mode for the received parameters, starting from the current mode and then trying modes in the order of FAST, DEFAULT, LOW_POWER, and FULL_RANGE.
* Blocks the ability of the peripheral to autonomously change connection latency.
* Cancels any pending HID SCI mode or latency update requests.
* If no SCI mode matches the parameters, switches to the NONE mode.

>   From this point on, the module will not attempt to update the latency until a new connection rate update is received.

Reviewer: Doesn't these 3 last bullet points describe behavior in case BLE conn params do not fit into any HID SCI mode? Can we slightly improve wording here to emphasize that, please?

Author: No, actually this is the intended behavior I have chosen for any such "direct" request - the SCI mode is only informative for direct connection parameters. This is still out of spec behavior of the host even if the parameters fit some mode. 
And for any "forced" parameters we might loose the ability to switch freely between modes, as the parameters become restricted by this forced update.

Reviewer: Discussed offline. We can leave it as is (improve later if needed)

This recovery behavior is application-specific and is not mandated by the specification.
It allows the peripheral to remain connected and usable with hosts that do not follow the Control Point negotiation procedure.

> In order to return to the normal operation, the host must:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In order to return to the normal operation, the host must either:
```

> 1. Update the transport parameters to a range allowing to support all the HID SCI modes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Update the transport parameters to a range of any HID SCI mode supported by peripheral.
```

> 2. Request an SCI mode change through the HID Control Point characteristic.

Reviewer: Would it actually help? Wouldn't the enforced parameters still block the peripheral from the needed connection rate update?

Reviewer: Maybe we should skip the information about recovery and simply mention that host should not trigger out-of-spec behavior? (to avoid going into details)

Author: Using the word "either" was incorrect.

If point 1 is followed we do not run into such a risk (this was tested).

However point 2 is strictly necessary, as this is how the code is wired (detecting a HID control write clears the out-of-spec behavior)

Author: I really would like to keep this documented - it might be useful for us to know how it works. Perhaps we will need to take advantage of it in the future on the dongle side.

Reviewer: Now it makes a lot more sense. Thanks for the clarification! Let's keep it

> 2. Request an SCI mode change through the HID Control Point characteristic.

Reviewer 4: These are not really steps 1 and 2. So, something like:

To return to the normal operation, the host must either update... or request...

Author: The "either" was a mistake - both steps are needed, fixed this
